---
layout: post
title:  "New Year and Terraform"
date:   2018-01-04 14:02:00 +0200
categories: General
---

Happy new year. This is the year that I will finally be able to move on from a vague understanding of DevOps to feeling 
that I have a fairly good understanding. To go with my new found experience and confidence I have decided to at least once 
a month put up an article discussing something I have been working on during that month. The idea is to help me remember
to share some of my experiences and of course to help other people who might have the same problems that I have experienced.

To start with I thought I would talk a little bit about terraform, starting with some basic commands that I have found to
be useful, and eventually giving a working example of making a terraform provider.

## Terraform Workspace

A Terraform workspace is a special separation of the terraform configuration to allow you to target different machines
normally in different environments. This essentially allows you to have the typical dev/qa/production type of situation
for your terraform configuration.

In order to use a workspace you will need to enable it by running the following command

```
terraform workspace new dev 
```

and then to switch workspaces

```
terraform workspace select dev
```

And there you have it, you can now target different workspaces in the same project without causing the environments to 
interfere with each other.

## So? How does this help?

So far, workspaces don't seem to do anything useful. How does this really help with anything? Well, lets work through a
simple example to show how you could use this make your life easier. 

### The complete separation

The first approach is literally separate your environments into different directories, such as...

```
+
+- Dev
   +- .terraform
   |- terraform.tfstate
   |- terraform.tfstate.backup
   |- main.tf
+- QA
   +- .terraform
   |- terraform.tfstate
   |- terraform.tfstate.backup   
   |- main.tf
+- Prod
   +- .terraform
   |- terraform.tfstate
   |- terraform.tfstate.backup   
   |- main.tf
```

This approach does not need workspaces at all and you are completely isolated from each environment. This means that you
absolutely cannot perform a change on Dev which suddenly happens on Prod, but you will also need to duplicate everything
common between each environment. This can be especially painful if you are adding addition providers to the _.terraform_
directory. In simple scenarios the above approach works fine, once you start getting into more complex environments it 
quickly becomes painful to try and split the environments up like this.

### Use workspaces instead

Lets use workspaces instead, now the following is just my suggestion about how to layout this type of configuration and
should be taken as a example suggestion. So instead of the above directory structure you can do as follows

```
+
+- .terraform
+- dev
   |- main.tf
+- QA
   |- main.tf
+- prod
   |- main.tf
+- terraform.tfstate.d
```

And each sub directory will have a workspace associated with it. Unlike the above example only *one* _.terraform_ directory
exists and the _terraform.tfstate_ is folded into the _terraform.tfstate.d_ location instead. To work with this setup you
will need to run commands like this from the base directory

```
terraform worksapce select dev
terraform init ./dev
terraform plan ./dev
terraform apply ./dev
```

A second benefit to this approach is that is you somehow do accidentally target the wrong environment / workspace you should
see the problem in the plan stage.

You should try and mess around with workspaces, they will help ensure that your environments can be kept separate without
having to introduce messy workarounds, and it also allows you to keep common configuration easily accessible.