---
layout: post
title: Use PipEnv instead of requirements.txt
date: 2020-12-15 18:00:00 +0200
categories: General
published: true
---

Years ago when I first starting looking at Python the default package manager recommended was *pip* and it was a weak
experience and felt less complete compared to other languages such as ruby's bundler, C#'s nuget or node's npm. Compared
to other languages pip felt bare bones and fiddly to configure. Weirdly the method to indicate package dependencies using
pip was to create a `requirements.txt`, unlike the other languages you had to explicitly state what version of each
package upfront and does not "lock" packages when installed.

Ideally a package manager should have the following features
* Package Locking and version management
* Environment definition or requirements
* Configuration overrides

Pipenv provides good access to the above features and the following sections will describe how to use Pipenv to realize
the features. 

# Getting started

Pipenv is not installed as part of the python runtime by default, but pip is normally installed as part of the python 
runtime. So the easiest way to install Pipenv is to just run

```bash
$ pip install --user pipenv
```

Once installed the next step is just run the following command in your project directory

```bash
$ pipenv install
```

Or if you have a previous pip requirements file you can easily convert to Pipenv by running

```bash
$ pipenv install -r requirements.txt
```

And that will enable pipenv for your project. Once run you will notice that a few new files will be created, the *Pipfile*
and the *Pipfile.lock*. 

# Package Locking

Assuming you need to use the *requests* package, with pip and the *requirements.txt* you would normally just add the line

```
requests
```

to the requirements.txt and run the command `pip install -r requirements.txt`. A few problems occur with this approach
to installing packages. Unless you explicitly set the version of the package in the *requirements.txt* it will install
the current latest version of the *requests* package when the command is run. The biggest problem with that scenario is
that the version management needs to be explicitly set and when not set it is not possible to know which version of the
package was used during the development.

With Pipenv a *Pipfile.lock* file is created when the package are installed. Assuming the *Pipfile* looks as follows

```toml
[packages]
requests = "*"
```

When the command `pipenv install` is run it will install the latest version and flag that version in the *Pipfile.lock*
file. Keeping that file in the source repository will ensure that other developers will at least have the same version
when they also run `pipenv install`. The *Pipfile.lock* not only stores the version information, it also stores the
hashes of the packages, which ensures that packages are not only the same version, but contain the same information.
The hashes will help ensure that no sneak updates happen to the packages, which is not likely to be a problem with most
public packages, but helps a lot when packages are sourced from private repositories.

# Environment definitions

A really cool feature of pipenv is that the Python version can also be stored as part of the *Pipfile*. By default you
can indicate the required version by adding the following section

```toml
[requires]
python_version = "3.8"
```

The *requires* section serves as double duty in Pipenv. The first check is to ensure that the version of Python is 
available, but Pipenv also helps manage *virtualenv* configuration as well. When running the `pipenv install` command
it will automatically create a new virtual environment for the project as well. Finally, Pipenv will also download and
install the version of python if `pyenv` or `asdf` installed.

# Configuration Management

The final feature of Pipenv that a major enhancement over standard pip is that configuration can be stored as part of the
Pipfile. Ironically the *requirements.txt* has this feature already, but it is really a shorthand configuration for
what flags the pip command accepts. In the Pipfile you can define overall configuration using the following configuration

```toml
[[source]]
url = "https://pypi.org/simple"
verify_ssl = true
name = "pypi"
```

Updating the settings to point to local repositories if that is a requirement. Pip specifiers are also supported if you
need to limit packages to particular operating systems. 
